# 1.3 Determining Limits
[[Calculus and Vectors]]
[[1.3 Determining Limits Questions]]

## Reading Limits
The statement $\lim_{x \to 0} (4+h)=4$ reads as:\
	The limit as the value of $h$ approaches the value of 0 in the expression $(4+h)$ is $4$.\
	
The limit as $h$ approaches 0 of $(4+h)$ is 4.

1. $\lim_{h \to 5} (6-h)=1$\
	This is read as - The limit as $h$ approaches 5 of $(6-h)$ is 1.
	
2. $\lim_{x \to \infty} (4+x)=\infty$\
	This is read as - The limit as x approaches infinity of $(4+x)$ is $\infty$

## Basic Rules for the Evaluation of Limits
1. ### If you are dividing a constant value by a really large number, then the result of that division will be a number so small we consider it to be zero.

$$limit = \frac{constant}{infinity}=0$$

$$Example: \frac{7}{\infty}=0$$

2. ### The exact opposite, if you are dividing a really large number by a constant value, then the result will be really big.
$$limit=\frac{infinity}{constant}=infinity$$
$$Example: \frac{\infty}{7}=\infty$$

3. ### If you are dividing a constant by 0, the result will be infinitely large.
$$limit=\frac{constant}{0}=infinity$$
$$Example:limit=\frac{7}{0}=\infty$$

4. ### Dividing infinity by infinity does not provide any meaningful conclusions about the value of the expression.
$$\frac{infinity}{infinity}=undefined$$

5. ### Dividing 0 and 0 does not provide a meaningful conclusion. 

$$\frac{zero}{zero}=\frac{0}{0}$$

## Evaluating Limits

There are 4 methods of evaluating limits.

1. ### Straight Substitution
Find: $\lim_{x \to 5}(\frac{x^2-2x}{4-x})$

* Substitute 5 into $x$
$$\lim_{x \to 5}(\frac{x^2-2x}{4-x})=\frac{(5)^2-2(5)}{4-5}=\frac{25-10}{-1}=\frac{15}{-1}=-15$$

2. ### Factoring
This method uses factoring to simplify rational functions.
Find: $\lim_{x \to -3}(\frac{x^2+7x+12}{x+3})$

* Substitution in this case will give us $\frac{0}{0}$
* We will need to factor the quadratic in order to find a meaningful answer.

$$\lim_{x\to-3}(\frac{x^2+7x+12}{x+3})=\lim_{x\to-3}\frac{(x+3)(x+4)}{(x+3)}=\lim_{x\to-3}(x+4)$$

* Now, we can retry substitution 

$$\lim_{x\to-3}(x+4)=-3+4=1$$
$$\lim_{x \to -3}(\frac{x^2+7x+12}{x+3})=1$$

3. ### Dividing everything
This method divides every term by the variable with the highest power.
Find: $\lim_{x\to\infty}\frac{(5x^2+3x^2+1)}{(6x^3+x^2-3x)}$

* Substitution will give us $\frac{\infty}{\infty}$
* The expressions do not factor

Since the highest exponent is $x^3$, divide all terms by $x^3$

$$\lim_{x\to\infty}\frac{(5x^2+3x^2+1)}{(6x^3+x^2-3x)}$$
$$=\lim_{x\to\infty}(\frac{\frac{5x^3}{x^3}+\frac{3x^2}{x^3}+\frac{1}{x^3}}{\frac{6x^3}{x^3}+\frac{x^2}{x^3}-\frac{3x}{x^3}})$$
$$=\lim_{x\to\infty}\frac{(5+\frac{3}{x} + \frac{1}{x^3})}{(6+\frac{1}{x}-\frac{3}{x^2})}$$

* Now substitute in $\infty$ as $x$

$$\lim_{x\to\infty}\frac{(5+\frac{3}{\infty} + \frac{1}{\infty})}{(6+\frac{1}{\infty}-\frac{3}{\infty})}=\frac{5+0+0}{6+0+0}=\frac{5}{6}$$

4. ### Rationalizing
This method rationalizes either the numerator or denominator by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the conjugate of the root function.

Example: $$\lim_{h\to0}\frac{\sqrt{9+h}-3}{h}$$

* Substitution gives us $\frac{0}{0}$

* Rationalize the numerator by multiplying the numerator and denominator by the conjugate $(\sqrt{9+h}+3)$.

$$\lim_{h\to0}\frac{(\sqrt{9+h}-3)(\sqrt{9+h}+3)}{h(\sqrt{9+h}+3)}$$
$$\lim_{h\to0}\frac{(9+h)+3\sqrt{9+h}-3\sqrt{9+h}-9}{h(\sqrt{9+h+3})}$$
$$\lim_{h\to0}\frac{(9+h)-9}{h(\sqrt{9+h+3})}$$
$$\lim_{h\to0}\frac{h}{h(\sqrt{9+h+3})}$$

* Divide the $h$ out
$$=\lim_{h\to0}\frac{1}{\sqrt{9+h}+3}$$

* Now, sub in $0$ for $h$

$$\frac{1}{\sqrt{9+0}+3}=\frac{1}{\sqrt{9}+3}=\frac{1}{3+3}=\frac{1}{6}








	